We continue to study the course of financial management.
Today we have the next topic, marginal analysis.
In this topic, we will consider the following three questions.
First, we will focus on studying the category of marginal profit.
In the next question, we will see how this category is applied in the analysis of the margin of profit.
We will also consider a very important question in the course of financial management, the question of the point of non-profitability.
And we will finish today's lecture with the operational lever.
We also introduce this category from the point of view of its practical application in business.
All costs on the enterprise, depending on the change in the volume of production, can be divided into two groups.
Constant and variable.
Constant costs do not depend on the volume of production.
No matter how much the volume of production increases, they remain unchanged.
Constant costs are classified in different categories.
For example, temporary wage, taxes, rent, administrative expenses.
The second group of costs is variable costs.
They change in proportion to the growth or reduction of the volume of production.
If the enterprise increases production, its costs increase.
If the volume of production decreases, the variable costs decrease.
The group of variable costs includes the most various costs, but also the most important.
The costs of raw materials.
The more production is produced, the more costs are spent on raw materials.
The cost of this group is the labor wage.
The more production they produce, the more they pay for the production of this product.
The same applies to fuel and energy.
This is the simplest approach to determining the costs of constant and variable costs.
The relationship between the costs of constant and variable costs can be imagined as follows.
In this slide, you can see how the costs of constant and variable costs add up to form the total costs.
You can see that the costs are equal to the sum of the costs of constant and variable costs multiplied by the volume of production.
This is how the total costs of the enterprise are formed.
Let's talk about variable costs.
Variable costs can be divided into proportional, progressive, and degressive, depending on how they change with the increase in the volume of production.
If the variable costs increase directly proportional to the increase in the volume of production,
for example, if the volume of production increases by two times and the variable costs increase by two times,
then we talk about proportional variable costs.
But this is not always the case.
The fact is that proportional variable costs only exist when there are no changes in the production process at the enterprise.
The technology is not improving, there is no increase in labor productivity.
If these processes are implemented at the enterprise, then we have a different form of variable costs.
Variable costs can increase either faster or slower than the volume of production increases.
If labor productivity increases, if production efficiency increases, then variable costs increase slower than the volume of production increases.
Then we talk about degressive variable costs.
For example, the volume of production increased by two times, that is, by 100%, and the variable costs increased by 70%.
Why?
Because the new technology has been implemented, which has allowed to save materials, resources, energy, and fuel.
As a result, the variable costs have increased to a lesser extent than the volume of production.
But unfortunately, there are also progressive costs, when the costs increase faster than the volume of production.
This happens less often, but nevertheless, when the rhythm of production is disrupted,
when labor productivity decreases, when there are failures at the enterprise,
when progressive technology cannot be used, then progressive variable costs take place.
The costs increase faster than the labor productivity increases.
This is the worst possible variant of variable costs.
Depending on the variant chosen, the variables can be distinguished.
The cost-reaction coefficient.
You can see how it is defined on the slide.
The cost-reaction coefficient is defined as the change in costs to the change in the volume of production.
If the cost-reaction coefficient is 1, then the changes in the volume of production and the change in variable costs increase proportionally.
If the coefficient is greater than 1, then the costs increase faster than the volume of production.
And vice versa, if the coefficient is less than 1, then the costs increase slower than the volume of production.
The graph on the slide shows how the costs change with the corresponding increase in the volume of production.
You can see different variants here.
The coefficient is less than 1, and the coefficient is equal to 1 with proportional costs, or K is greater with progressive costs.
This is how the costs increase with the increase in the volume of production.
The theoretical question allows us to approach the consideration of the operation of the enterprise.
We have already discussed three possible variants.
Which one is better?
The most ideal is the degressive variant.
This is when the costs increase slower than the volume of production.
This is the ideal variant.
And the less the coefficient is, the better.
The normal variant, the average variant, is the proportional variant,
when the variable costs and the volume of production increase to the same degree.
Now, when we know this, those of you who own your own enterprise should pause, stop the recording,
and look at your own enterprise carefully.
Calculate, or you can ask your economists to calculate how the variable costs increase at your enterprise in relation to the volume of production.
And then draw a practical conclusion.
If the costs increase slower than the volume of production, you have an ideal enterprise.
You can be congratulated on the right path of the development of your enterprise's economy.
If the costs and the volume of production increase proportionally, this is tolerable, this is normal, but this is a borderline situation.
Because, unfortunately, the variable costs can increase faster than the volume of production.
This is where you should raise the alarm.
And you should ring all the bells.
You should look at why the variable costs increase faster than the volume of production.
The thing is, if you don't stop this process, it will lead to the increase in the cost of production.
The cost will increase more and more.
And the price at which you produce this product will remain the same.
If the cost increases and the price remains constant, your profit will decrease, decrease, decrease.
It will be reduced to zero, and then to losses.
And that's it, the enterprise will stop its activity.
In order to prevent this from happening, you should pay attention to the ratio of the variable costs and the volume of production.
What should be done to make this coefficient ideal, so that the costs increase slower than the volume of production?
You should increase the productivity of your enterprise.
This is the main conclusion.
You should find ways to increase the volume faster than the costs of production increase.
If you solve this problem, your enterprise will save on costs.
And, therefore, the profit will increase more and more.
The higher the profit, the greater the opportunity for your enterprise to develop.
This is the practical application of this question.
I would like to draw your attention to the business owners.
Pay attention to this coefficient in your enterprise.
Calculate it and draw the appropriate conclusion.
And now we move on to the second question of our topic.
The second question is about the analysis of the profits.
This analysis is based on the marginal analysis.
And the topic of our topic is called the marginal analysis.
The marginal analysis evaluates the marginal profit, the price coefficient,
the points of profitability in the production process, both in terms of money and in terms of natural expression,
the reserve of financial strength that exists in the enterprise,
and the possible cases when it decreases.
The operation lever is evaluated, what opportunities it gives to the enterprise.
And at the end we will consider the factors that affect the change of the specified quantities.
First, what is the marginal profit?
The marginal profit is the difference between the revenue from sales and the variable costs.
The slide you see now shows the formula that shows how the marginal profit is determined.
It is simply the difference between the revenue and the variable costs.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the category of marginal profit
differs from the category of the value-added profit that we discussed in the last lecture.
These are two different categories.
They do not coincide and can only be equal in a particular case.
In a general case, they are different. Why?
The value-added profit is the difference between the revenue and the value-added cost.
And the marginal profit is the difference between the revenue and only the variable costs.
And we remember, today we were discussing this issue,
and we were told that the enterprise has two types of costs, variable and constant.
But the marginal profit does not take into account the constant costs.
This is a completely different category and is used for a completely different analysis.
I would like to draw your attention to this so that you do not get confused.
Why is the marginal profit necessary? Why is this category introduced?
The marginal profit serves as a basis for determining the surplus volume of sales.
And for an enterprise, for each type of product, such a marginal profit can be calculated,
as well as in general for an enterprise, and to justify the appropriate management decisions
that allow to get the maximum profit, to get the largest volume of profit.
Now I would like to draw your attention to the next chart.
I hope you will watch it for a long time while I comment on it.
This is the most important chart of our lecture today.
Pay attention.
On this chart you see two important intersecting curves.
One curve is the revenue curve.
It is proportional to the volume of production.
We believe that the price of a product is constant,
and the more the product is sold, the more the revenue is.
It is proportional to the volume of production.
The second curve is the full cost.
The full cost consists of two components.
It consists of variable costs and constant costs.
You see that the full cost is shown as the sum of constant and variable costs.
The difference between the revenue and the variable costs is the marginal profit.
The graph shows the marginal profit, and we can see its magnitude.
The most important point of this graph is the intersection of the revenue and the full cost.
The point where the intersection of these two curves occurs is called the lossless point.
This point has a special name.
Look at what happens during production.
When the production is less than the lossless point,
we have the following situation.
The cost of the product is higher than the revenue.
The full cost is higher than the revenue.
The enterprise is paid more than the production.
The simplest example is a huge factory that produces ballpoint pens.
The first ballpoint pen was produced at this huge factory.
The cost of production is much higher than the revenue.
This is the point we are going to discuss.
When the production is small, it is because the enterprise is starting to work.
Or it is because the enterprise is not producing enough.
The cost is not the same.
The cost is higher than the revenue.
If the cost is higher than the revenue,
what is the enterprise's profit or loss?
The enterprise is losing money.
The cost is higher than the revenue.
The left side of the graph shows the loss area.
The enterprise is losing money while working in this area.
The enterprise is losing money.
Of course, the loss will be the same when the first ballpoint pen is produced.
Of course, the enterprise will lose money.
The enterprise will have to work while the production is increasing.
When the production is increasing,
the revenue increases because the production is increasing.
Finally, the revenue is equal to the total costs.
In this case, the difference between the revenue and the costs is zero.
The enterprise compensated all the costs.
Yes, there is no profit.
But this is the first victory.
You can shout hurray and drink champagne.
The enterprise is working in a way that it can't afford to lose money.
All the new enterprises are going through this point.
This is the most joyful point.
The most anxious expectations and thoughts are coming to the enterprise.
The enterprise should leave the loss area as soon as possible.
Finally, we left the loss area.
This is why this point is called the point of no loss.
Finally, there is no loss.
Now, we should pay attention to the right side of the graph.
The right side is the point of no loss.
Pay attention.
The direct revenue is higher than the direct total costs.
What does it mean?
It means that the revenue is higher than the costs.
If the revenue is higher than the costs, the enterprise gets a profit.
Finally, the enterprise gets a profit.
Pay attention.
The further we leave the point of no loss,
the difference between the revenue and the total costs becomes bigger and bigger.
The curves diverge.
What does it mean?
The enterprise gets more and more profits.
The first conclusion we can draw from this graph is that the enterprise needs to increase the production volume to reach the point of no loss.
This is the minimum program.
Without this, the enterprise cannot function for a long time.
It will stop and cease to exist.
This is why we must reach this point.
This is the minimum program.
The number one program.
The second task of the enterprise after reaching the point of no loss is to increase the production volume as much as possible.
To move away from the point of no loss.
The further the enterprise moves away from the point of no loss,
the more products it produces, the more profits it gets.
We will talk about this today.
We will discuss this graph later.
We will discuss how far we can go from the point of no loss.
We will discuss whether there are other effects.
We will discuss this later.
For now, we are making the most important conclusion.
The enterprise should work with a production volume greater than the point of no loss.
We have seen the marginal profit on this graph.
I will define the marginal profit as the difference between the revenue and the variable costs.
It is important to calculate the marginal profit on the enterprise.
The growth of the marginal profit positively characterizes the dynamics of the enterprise.
If the enterprise has a marginal profit, it has a prospect for development.
The enterprise can expand due to the profit.
It can increase the social needs of the employees of the enterprise.
It can also increase the income of the owners of the enterprise.
All this is decided by the profit.
An important coefficient that characterizes the marginal profit is the price coefficient.
The price coefficient is another name for the marginal profit.
The higher the price coefficient, the better the enterprise works.
The price coefficient is determined by the marginal profit.
The price coefficient is determined by the following factors that affect it.
The higher the price of the product, the higher the revenue, the greater the marginal profit.
The marginal profit is only connected with the variable costs.
If the revenue is higher and the variable costs are the same, the price will increase along with the marginal profit.
The price coefficient is connected with the prices of the variable costs.
But it is inversely proportional.
If the prices of the variable costs increase, the marginal profit decreases.
Therefore, any enterprise should ensure that it sells the product in the best possible way,
and that it receives the most revenue from the sale of the product.
At the same time, it should ensure that the enterprise's costs do not increase so rapidly and that the revenue is not eaten up.
As we have already said, the most ideal scenario is a degressive increase in the variable costs,
when the revenue increases faster than the costs.
The price coefficient and the product's nomenclature affect it.
In other words, what do you produce?
The thing is that if a company produces a lot of different types of products,
each of them has its own marginal profit and contributes to the total marginal profit of the company.
Each product has a different marginal profit,
so one product is more profitable and the other is less profitable.
Therefore, by changing the structure of the produced product,
you can change the total marginal profit of the enterprise.
It should be noted here, and, therefore,
we should try to produce more of the product that gives more marginal profit.
Naturally, if the market accepts this product, if you can realize it,
if the market's ability to purchase a product is much greater than your ability to produce it,
then you should boldly reorient the structure of your production to the production of the product that gives more marginal profit.
This is a very important point.
It turns out that the structure of the produced product is not random.
And it is not only determined by the market, not only by what is in demand,
but the structure also affects what kind of profit you will get.
Will you be a profitable enterprise, a highly profitable enterprise, or only a little bit profitable?
Therefore, dear owners, you can stop listening to this lecture again.
Take a pencil in your hand and carefully study the structure of your produced product,
inviting economists and financiers to see what kind of marginal profit each of your produced products brings.
And together with the market experts, consider whether it is possible to increase the volume of the product that brings the greatest marginal profit.
If your market experts agree to produce more of this product, you can boldly reorient the production process.
You can increase the production volume of one particular product and reduce the volume of another product that does not bring you the profit that the enterprise needs.
Along with the change in the structure of production, the change in the technology of production also affects the amount of marginal profit.
Technology is equipment, technological processes, and, in the end, the qualification of the workers involved in this process.
In other words, it is all that affects the costs of production.
Technology can have a double effect.
It can change the amount of variable costs, they can decrease, and this is a positive phenomenon,
because if the variable costs decrease, we have a degressive growth of production, which we only dreamed of,
when the variable costs grow slower than the production volume.
Such a change in the technology of production should only be welcomed.
This is the best, the most ideal option.
But this is not the only option.
You can change the technology and increase the constant costs.
Increasing the constant costs does not mean that your profit will increase.
The thing is that increasing the constant costs causes increasing the cost of production.
At the same price, which you will implement, this leads to a decrease in profit.
But equipment with a higher price can be more durable.
It can produce more products.
In this case, it will be more effective than cheaper equipment, which serves a very short time.
Therefore, if you change the technology and the constant costs change,
this requires further study.
It is impossible to answer whether the marginal profit will improve.
The short-term marginal profit may decrease,
and the total marginal profit for the entire service life of equipment may be greater.
It is very important to pay attention to the goal of the owner of the enterprise.
Do you want to get the maximum profit in one day?
Or do you want to get the maximum profit for the entire service life of your enterprise?
What is the goal of your business?
Based on this, you can build up the costs of changing the technology.
The point of non-profitability, which characterizes the production process,
and which is very important for us, as we have just seen, can be calculated accurately.
There are formulas for this, which you can see on the screen.
The point of non-profitability in a natural way means the amount of products
that the enterprise must produce in order to be not in loss,
in order to be able to say that the revenue and the costs coincided.
Yes, the profit is zero, but it is not a loss.
So, the point of non-profitability in the quantitative expression is equal to
the fraction in the numerator of the production of the constant costs per unit of the product,
multiplied by the number of produced products, and in the denominator the marginal profit.
Thus, the amount of products that must be produced in order to be not in loss is determined.
You can stop the lecture once again and ask your economist,
how many products do you produce?
Now you know how many of them must be produced in order to be not in loss.
The same formula is only in the constant expression.
That is, in the monetary expression, not in the quantity of the products.
Again, look at the screen.
The point of non-profitability in the quantitative expression is equal to
the fraction in the numerator of the production of the constant costs per unit,
multiplied by the revenue, and divided by the marginal profit.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that these formulas are fair
only for a company that produces one type of product.
If there are many types of products at a company, the formula becomes somewhat complicated.
Although the logic remains the same.
You just need to consider several types of products, sum them up,
and consider the point of non-profitability in relation to each of the types of produced products.
After we have studied the point of non-profitability,
I would like to emphasize that everything we are discussing today is not just a theory.
This is a practice that must be tested.
It is necessary to look at how the production is in your company.
How much do you produce?
How far have you moved away from the point of non-profitability?
Or maybe you haven't even approached it yet?
Depending on where you are in relation to the point of non-profitability
and where you are moving towards the point of non-profitability or away from it,
the management decisions depend on it.
The management decisions will be completely different
depending on where you are in relation to the point of non-profitability.
If you are on the right side of the point of non-profitability,
and the volume of your products is increasing, you should be happy.
You can have a holiday at the company.
This means that your marginal profit is growing,
and things are going well at the company.
If you are on the right side of the point of non-profitability,
but the dynamics of production is such that the volume of products is decreasing,
and you are moving to the point of non-profitability on the right,
this is a disturbing symptom.
Now we will look at another practical application of the material we have just discussed.
So, we say that the more to the right we are from the point of non-profitability,
the better our enterprise is doing economically.
What does it mean?
It means that the company has a reserve of financial strength.
It has more and more profit, which it receives.
And, accordingly, if it receives as much profit as possible,
then its financial strength increases.
The reserve of financial strength shows how much percentage
the volume of the implementation can be reduced or increased
to maintain or achieve the surplus level of work.
The reserve of financial strength is very important for the enterprise.
The enterprise should feel confident in business,
so the reserve of financial strength should be as much as possible.
The reserve of financial strength is mathematically defined
as the absolute deviation from the point of non-profitability to the profit.
We should look at how far our production volume
exceeds the volume at which there is a point of non-profitability,
and divide this excess into the profit that the enterprise has.
This is the reserve of financial strength.
The higher the reserve of financial strength,
the better the enterprise is doing.
Again, we should calculate the reserve of financial strength.
And it is even better to ask to calculate it for equal periods of time.
For example, once a quarter, when the financial report is submitted,
we should calculate the reserve of financial strength for the economists
to compare and see how the dynamics of the enterprise's financial strength changes.
If it increases, it is great.
It means that your enterprise feels good,
and soon it will feel great.
This is a reason to rejoice.
If the reserve of financial strength decreases,
it is a warning bell.
We should pay attention to this.
We should look at why the reserve of financial strength decreases.
Why?
Because the decrease of the reserve of financial strength
means that the enterprise will feel more and more uncomfortable in the market.
Once again, the higher the reserve of financial strength,
the more stable the enterprise is.
Moreover, the reserve of financial strength allows us to compare different enterprises.
We can say which enterprise is more stable in the market, which is less stable.
Stability also depends on the life of the enterprise in the market.
The more stable it is, the more guarantees it has that it will exist longer and more successfully.
Moreover, the reserve of financial strength is like the height of a boat.
When it is still, the height of the boat does not matter.
But when the waves are increasing,
the boat with a small boat will soon sink and sink.
And the boat with a high boat will be more stable
and will be able to overcome all the obstacles that arose before it.
Therefore, once again, study how the reserve of financial strength of your enterprise changes.
And do everything possible to ensure that the reserve of financial strength does not decrease,
but rather increases and increases.
We have already discussed that when an enterprise goes through a point of profitability
and starts producing more and more products,
its profit starts to increase, increase, increase.
And this is just great, we should be happy about it.
But then we noted that such a state does not always take place.
The fact is that if we look at what will happen with a very strong increase in the volume of production,
we will face geometrically opposite pictures.
Look carefully at the graph that is now in front of you.
The area that we have just studied is located in the circle.
Remember the intersection of two straight lines?
Profit and total costs.
What we have studied is only related to this small circle.
And inside this circle, everything is fair.
But look at what is changing outside this circle.
How much the picture changes.
Everything that happens outside the circle does not coincide with what happens inside the circle.
Everything that we have just studied is related to overcoming the point of profitability.
We have just crossed it and are starting to live better, better, better, to produce more.
Everything is great, but it is close to the point of profitability.
And what is waiting for us next?
We will develop our enterprise.
The enterprise will produce more and more and more products.
Look, we are moving along the X axis.
We are increasing the volume of production.
The profit curve is significantly superior to the cost curve.
And we see that the further we move along the X axis,
the difference between the profit and the total costs becomes more and more and more.
See?
Great.
The profit is increasing, increasing, increasing.
But it cannot increase infinitely.
And that is why.
The thing is that if we increase any of the production factors,
the benefit we get from increasing this production factor will increase.
But the increase in the benefit we will get from increasing this factor will increase on a smaller scale.
That is, it will decrease all the time.
The simplest example.
In a hot afternoon, you really want to drink.
You drink a glass of mineral water.
Very good.
You completely quench your thirst.
But if you pour the same second glass of mineral water in the same way,
the benefit from its consumption will be less than the benefit from the first glass of water.
And if you drink the third, fourth, fifth glass of water at once,
the benefits of each glass of water will decrease until it becomes zero.
And if you drink water even further,
you will get even negative results, negative benefits.
And this is good for almost everything.
Consumption of any benefit, the more we consume it, the more useful it becomes.
But the increase in the benefit decreases, decreases, and decreases until it becomes zero.
There are only two benefits.
They are considered to be insatiable thirst for power and money.
And both seem to be even better.
All other benefits are insatiable.
And the increase in the benefit consumption always leads to the moment when further benefit consumption becomes indifferent and even harmful.
We have the same thing in production.
You can imagine several options for changing the production situation.
For example, we change the equipment, improve the equipment, improve the main funds.
We leave the rest unchanged, untouched.
Imagine, our enterprise worked only in one shift, produced a certain amount of products.
We change the equipment.
We have now put more perfect equipment.
We don't over-train the workers, we decided that we don't change anything else.
More perfect equipment.
Yes, more perfect equipment is more effective, it allows us to produce more products.
But until our workers, whom we don't over-train, are able to work with this equipment.
If we continue to change the equipment, put the most perfect machines with numerical software, which requires a very high qualification of the workers,
then we will see that our workers cannot work on these machines without the appropriate increase in skill.
They will stop and production will freeze.
It would seem that we have put the most perfect machines, it is impossible to invent better.
We cannot even produce a single product.
It turns out that increasing one factor of production and investing in one factor of production not only contributes to growth,
but from some point on it can stop production.
This is typical for other factors of production.
Let's increase the number of workers, and leave the equipment the same.
For example, an enterprise that worked in one shift will be transferred to work in two shifts.
We will increase the number of workers at the enterprise.
From the point of view of the enterprise, this is great.
Working in two shifts is very effective for the enterprise, because it allows two shifts of workers to work on the same equipment.
Accordingly, the constant costs are the same, and the volume of products increases almost double.
Therefore, we increase the profit that the enterprise receives.
It is just great.
The transition from one shift to two shifts is a very good solution for any production enterprise.
Now let's try to continue this line.
Let's start working in three shifts.
From the point of view of equipment use, this is a positive phenomenon,
because the same equipment works within one day, during three shifts.
However, working in a third shift is always less effective than working in a first and second shift.
The workers who work in the third shift at the enterprise, no matter how hard they try to work well,
nevertheless, the body requires rest at night, physiologically.
And a worker at night is not as active as he is at day time.
His movements are slower, his mental abilities are even slower.
Yes, a person works, but the return from him to the third shift is much less,
because deep in the subconscious, a person sleeps, rests at night.
This is how the human body works, he should rest at night.
This is how nature has built a human life for millions of years.
Therefore, in the third shift we always have a lower productivity of labor.
Moreover, a worker in the third shift needs to rest more, to take more breaks.
Moreover, it should be noted that there are always fewer people who want to work in the third shift
than those who want to work in the first and second shifts.
And if there are fewer people who want to work, then to attract them to work,
workers in the third shift need to pay more wages.
We see that there is less production, and the pay in the third shift is higher.
Therefore, the economic efficiency of the enterprise in the third shift is lower than in the first shift.
Thus, wanting to improve the situation, we go from one shift to two, and see significant improvements,
and we go to work in the third shift and see a slowdown.
The third shift does not give the same growth as, for example, the second shift.
The third shift is less effective.
Let's not increase the number of workers, let's increase their qualifications.
Let's approach this issue from the third side.
We have the simplest equipment that workers use.
And the workers cope with it perfectly.
Let's not change the equipment, the simplest thing, let's start to increase the qualifications.
Instead of unqualified workers, let's take workers from the technical school qualification.
These workers are more qualified, they have theory and practice,
they have better skills than unqualified workers who just came from the street,
who have been entrusted with equipment, and who can harm this equipment more than use it.
And qualified workers are a completely different matter.
Therefore, the increase in the qualification of the work used instead of unqualified workers,
there is a positive phenomenon.
That's why enterprises always look for workers of higher qualifications.
But we continue to move in this direction.
And instead of qualified workers, we will take and offer this job to a qualified worker with a higher education.
And here we have the first call.
On the one hand, a qualified worker with a higher education has theory.
If he studied well and listened to the lectures we are listening to now.
He has higher knowledge than a worker, even a qualified one, I mean theoretical knowledge.
But a worker of a higher education has more emphasis on theoretical knowledge than on practical knowledge.
Unlike a worker who graduated from a technical school.
And that's why this worker has theoretical knowledge, but to a lesser extent he has practical skills.
That's why when graduates of the universities come and start working for the first time in their lives at enterprises,
they have to study a lot, to learn, to gain those skills of practical experience that no institute can give them.
But that's not the task of the institute.
The task of the institute is to give theoretical skills, first of all.
Well, and practical skills, but still, first of all, theoretical skills.
And if we start to raise our level further, and instead of workers who have just graduated from the institute,
we'll start to invite people who have a very high theoretical education.
Candidates to science, PhD students, academics.
We'll invite them to work and say, here's a hammer, here's a chisel, dear academics, let's work.
What will be our return?
Do you think our efficiency will increase from such work or decrease?
Yes, dear academics have a huge amount of knowledge.
But, to be honest, there are probably some academics who have held a chisel and hammer only in their childhood.
And to say that they can do a great job of work that a worker should do, you can doubt that.
But that's not all.
The salary of the academics is, of course, higher than that of those who don't have such a high scientific qualification.
Consequently, fewer skills in work and higher salary.
Thus, we see that further increase in the qualification of a worker leads to a decrease in the efficiency of its use.
Any factor of production that we don't take, if we increase it,
only this factor increases, it leads to a decrease in the efficiency of production.
At first it grows, then the growth stops, and then there's a decrease. Always.
What should be done to prevent this from happening?
The answer is simple.
Change the factors in a complex way.
If we increase the qualification of a worker, then we change the equipment together with him.
Or vice versa, if we increase the equipment, we put a better one, we increase the qualification of the worker.
If we put the machines with numerical software instead of the usual machines,
then the workers who should work for these machines should have a higher qualification.
Then the equipment and the workers will correspond to each other.
And the production will grow and not decrease.
But this is regarding the use of equipment and workers.
As for, for example, the work in the third shift, here, unfortunately, we will get a decrease anyway.
Because it's impossible to make a person who would live only in the night,
he needs to completely rebuild himself and live only in the night,
which is unlikely to be interesting for the workers themselves.
After all, a person is a daily being.
Thus, we have seen that the change of production factors in enterprises is rather ambiguous.
It's impossible to say that if we improve the production factor, then we will have a cloudless life in the future.
No, it's a very subtle question.
Here, it's possible to improve the production factor.
It's certainly so.
We need to look at how the costs are increasing.
If the volume of production grows faster than the costs,
that is, the growth of the production volume in the unit of production grows faster than the growth of the costs in the unit of production,
then we have a positive phenomenon in the economy.
We have an increase in the profits for the enterprise.
But if the growth of the revenue volume grows slower than the growth of the costs,
then we have a reverse picture.
The costs grow faster than the revenue volume, and the profit value decreases.
This is exactly what the graph you see in front of you is reflecting.
Now, pay attention to this graph.
We are already moving away from what is depicted in the left part and moving to the middle of this graph.
Look carefully.
If an enterprise produces a product equal to x2, then we have the largest maximum profit.
It is at this point that the revenue in relation to costs, the difference between revenue and costs, is the highest.
This is the ideal point for production.
Any businessman should know this point for his enterprise.
This is the point of production where the maximum profit in relation to the unit of production is the highest.
This is a very important point.
The thing is that if we work to the left or to the right of this point,
that is, we will produce more or less products,
we will get less profit in relation to the unit of production.
We will work to the left.
Yes, the enterprise will work at full capacity, but there will be no profit.
And it is at this point that the profit from the unit of production is the highest.
This is the point that we need to find.
Therefore, it is high time to stop listening to lectures, call an economist and give him a task.
Find out the point at which the maximum profit will be produced at the enterprise.
And then compare the real point at which your enterprise is located with this point of maximum profit.
Look where you are.
To the left or to the right?
How far are you from the point of maximum profit?
The thing is that if you are to the left, you need to increase the volume of production.
And then you will reach the level where you will get the maximum profit per unit of production.
Attention!
There is a very important point here.
You should not only produce the product, but also sell it.
Otherwise, it will be in your warehouse and will cause even more harm than if you did not produce this product.
Therefore, before making a decision that you need to increase the volume of production,
you need to invite a marketologist and give him a task.
Find out whether we can implement a larger volume of production of our product on the market.
Will the market accept this product?
This is a very serious question.
There are other competitors on the market who produce this product.
This is an important question.
If the marketologist answers that the market will accept this product, the market is not saturated,
you can boldly set the task to increase the volume of production and increase production to the value of X2,
to the point where the maximum profit per unit of production is.
You can boldly follow this path.
This is the right path to the development of the enterprise.
And if the marketologist says no,
unfortunately, we are already producing the maximum amount of products that the market can accept.
This is a completely different question.
This means that further increase in the number of produced products is not feasible.
Otherwise, the product will be all in the warehouse.
Yes, the profit per unit of production is less,
but this is the maximum that can be achieved in these conditions.
Here you need to look at the question more broadly.
Can we increase the volume of production if we reduce the price?
This will be the second task for the marketologist.
The fact is that the reduction of the price leads to a reduction in profit,
but the movement to the point X2 leads to an increase in profit.
What is more, will the profit be reduced from the reduction of the price,
or will the profit be increased due to the increase in the volume of production?
Here you need to compare, you need to look carefully.
If we get more profit from increasing the volume of production,
and if we give part of it to the consumer due to the reduction of the price,
then this is the right way to move to the enterprise.
But if during the calculation it turns out that the volume of production,
which characterizes your enterprise, is to the right of the point X2,
the maximum profit per unit of production,
then the situation is diametrically opposite.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that here you cannot increase the volume of production.
It would seem logical that the more you produce, the better,
but in fact this is not the case at all.
I would even say that this is absolutely not the case.
The fact is that the amount of profit per unit of production is reduced.
Therefore, if you are to the right of the point of the maximum profit per unit of production,
then you have two options.
Now we will talk about them in the story.
The first option is seen on the graph.
This is, of course, to shift to the left to the point X2,
that is, to reduce the volume of production.
No matter how paradoxical it may seem,
you need to reduce the volume of production to get profit,
rather than increase the volume of production so as not to get this profit.
After all, if we shift further, for example, to the point X3 on the graph,
it would seem that we have increased the volume of production,
we have become so good, but the profit is zero.
The meaning of our existence is zero.
In this case, of course, shifting to the left to the point X2,
where the maximum profit per unit of production is reduced, is more logical.
You will say, but we want to increase the volume of production,
we want to expand our enterprise.
How can we do this? Why can't we increase the volume of production?
Well, why can't we increase the volume of production at this enterprise is already clear,
but how to increase the volume of production in general is a separate conversation.
The fact is that what we are talking about
characterizes this plant or this workshop or this site for the production of products.
But if there is a second such plant or site next to it,
also tuned for the optimal volume of production,
then in total they will produce twice as much production.
At the same time, each of these sites will be tuned for the optimal regime.
This is a very important point.
By printing the optimal regimes,
the second site, the third, the fourth, the fifth,
spreading them all over the country, all over the globe.
Pay attention to how McDonald's works.
McDonald's has not created the only one establishment
from which Big Macs are brought all over the globe.
No. McDonald's creates points similar to each other all over the globe.
As a result, each point is tuned for the optimal regime
and in total they give a huge amount of products
in the optimal regime in terms of profit.
This is much better than if there was only one McDonald's
for the whole globe.
The same is true here.
If we have found the optimal production regime for our enterprise,
then the next step is to copy this production.
Remember the example of McDonald's and decide to move in this direction.
Build a second workshop next to it, a third workshop, a fourth workshop.
You can build them next to each other.
You can open branches in other cities.
These are all issues of the same order.
The most important thing is that each production site
will be optimally tuned and will bring you the maximum profit
per unit of the produced product.
This is a very important point.
This regime has its own name.
It is called the American business regime.
It is believed that all American enterprises work in the regime
of the maximum profit per unit of production.
But this is not the only regime.
As I told you today that you can move from the point to the right of X2
in two different directions,
I meant that there is another possible direction of movement.
If we are interested in profit,
we are interested in its absolute maximum amount.
What happens in this case?
The absolute amount of profit is the product of the profit per unit of production
multiplied by the number of produced products.
Is this question clear?
The conclusion is that the maximum amount of profit
can be obtained by the optimal combination of these two quantities,
the profit per unit of production and the number of produced products.
You can not have the maximum profit per unit of production,
but have such a large number of products
that their products will give the largest amount of profit.
This regime was called the Japanese regime.
It is assumed that Japanese enterprises work in this regime.
They get the maximum profit,
but the profit per unit of production is not the maximum.
The work in this regime means the production of a huge amount of products.
Yes, the profit per unit of production is reduced.
Look, this point, which characterizes the Japanese production process,
is to the right of X2 on our graph.
Yes, the profit per unit of production will be 10% less.
And the production volume will be 50% more.
The production of these two quantities will give more than we had in X2.
That is, working in this second regime, the Japanese production regime,
gives the maximum profit for the enterprise.
Yes, the profit per unit of production is very small.
But the value of this profit is huge.
It is the maximum amount of products that can be obtained at this enterprise.
If you work in the first regime,
you need to distribute these products to the workshops,
to the plots, all over the country, all over the globe.
Working in the second regime does not mean that you will be distributed.
It means that the maximum profit will be taken from this enterprise.
The profit that can be obtained at this enterprise.
Maybe it is a transition to two shifts.
Maybe it is some other technical solution.
But the maximum profit will be the total profit of this enterprise.
There is a version of why these two regimes of work appeared.
Some countries work in one regime, and some countries work in another regime.
This version states the following.
The regime that is called the American regime,
that is, the maximum profit per unit of production,
is more characteristic for those countries where the territory allows to build new factories.
There is no problem with the land.
You can build many factories.
The country is huge, there is a lot of space.
You can easily build new buildings, new workshops.
And vice versa.
In small countries, where each piece of land is worth gold,
where it is very difficult to build another workshop, another factory,
there they try to make the maximum profit from the factory that has already been built.
Japan is the best example of this.
Look at the map.
Compare Russia with Japan in terms of territory.
They are incomparable.
Now imagine that Japan has almost the same population as Russia.
This small country on the map has almost the same population as Russia.
Not to mention that the production volume in Japan is colossal.
The land in Japan is worth gold.
Maybe that's why the way to make the maximum profit from the factory,
from the enterprise, from the land where the products are produced, is very difficult.
This regime is characterized by the production of a huge amount of products.
If in the first regime, when the maximum profit is one unit,
you don't need to produce a lot of products,
you need to produce the optimal amount of them,
then in the second regime you need to produce the maximum amount of products.
That's why Japan is famous for the huge amount of produced products.
With such a huge amount, it is inevitable to develop the foreign market,
with export to all countries of the world,
because this is inevitable in this regime of work.
We have compared two regimes.
It is appropriate to ask now,
which regime of work do our Russian enterprises work in?
As an owner of an enterprise,
who is listening to this lecture now,
think and answer yourself the question,
which regime of work is more suitable for us, Russian businessmen,
the American or the Japanese?
What are we striving for?
To get the maximum profit from a single produced product
or to get the maximum profit from an enterprise?
When I asked this question to other listeners at my lectures,
to the owners of enterprises,
who were listening to these lectures,
they all answered me in one voice,
that the American path is closer to them.
They say that every Russian enterprise is set up
to get the maximum profit from a single produced product.
But then I ask them the following question,
if this path is closer to us,
please tell me, do you market this production?
And they answer, no.
Unfortunately, in our country,
the issue of marketing production is not so simple.
It is not so easy for our businessmen
to open many branches all over the country.
It is a difficult issue.
Probably, in the USA it is easier to solve
if this method has received a similar name
and is more difficult for this country.
I would like for our business to be easier to develop branches,
to create enterprises all over the country,
since our business is also struggling to get the maximum profit from a single produced product.
Then we will get the maximum profit from a single produced product
and the maximum profit from a single produced product
that is widespread, concentrated,
closer to the consumer in all corners of the country and the world.
This is a very important point.
And before we move on,
you should think again about how your enterprise works,
what production mode is more optimal for your enterprise.
If you can market your products,
open a new branch, a new plot,
then the way to get the maximum profit from a single produced product is more acceptable.
But if you cannot do this for one reason or another,
lack of capital,
inability to get permission to build a new enterprise,
then the way is more Japanese.
Then you should try to get the maximum profit from this enterprise.
But you should not forget once again
that as soon as we move along the way of increasing production volume,
we should agree on this issue with marketologists.
Will we be able to implement this product?
If we increase production volume in several times,
it is not a fact that we can easily implement this product.
It is not a coincidence that these enterprises are concentrated all over the country,
that is, they are closer to the consumers.
Because to import a product from one point to all corners of the globe
is less effective than if production is concentrated all over the globe.
Remember McDonald's.
Imagine a McDonald's point
with Big Macs all over the globe.
You come in, order a meal, and wait for Big Macs to be delivered to you from the USA.
And you do not leave the cafe until it is delivered to you.
This is what the right production regime means.
To concentrate production or to produce at one point.
To produce the maximum profit from a single product
or to produce the maximum profit from the whole enterprise.
Each of you, businessmen,
current businessmen or those who are going to become businessmen,
because if you are studying MBA,
it means that you are ready to advance in business.
It is possible that in the future
each of you will become an owner of an enterprise,
who will manage the enterprise.
And you need to solve this issue for yourself.
How will your enterprise develop?
Where is the strategic line of development of your enterprise?
What do you want to get from your enterprise in terms of economy?
These are the most important questions.
And this graph that you see on the screen now,
you should remember it very carefully for the rest of your life.
And subconsciously, always increasing or decreasing the volume of production,
you should remember the consequences of this in terms of profit.
I want to draw your attention to one more point,
which exists on this graph.
The point X3.
We haven't talked about it today.
In fact, this is also an important point.
This is the point where the revenue and costs intersect again.
The second time they intersect in these two graphs.
Again, the revenue and costs are equal.
The revenue is decreasing because the production has become inefficient.
Remember, you have moved to the third shift,
or you have invited academics to work as workers.
The enterprise has become economically inefficient.
The revenue has gone down.
The costs have increased.
We have started to pay more.
The volume of production is not growing as fast as the costs are.
The enterprise becomes economically less efficient.
And the costs are increasing.
And once the costs become equal to the revenue.
Again, the profit becomes equal to zero.
But pay attention to what is even to the right of the X3 point.
The costs are higher than the revenue.
What does it mean?
It means that the profit of our enterprise has stopped.
And the enterprise is again in the loss zone.
Thus, increasing the volume of production,
it would seem that by speeding up the enterprise
to unbearable cosmic speeds,
we have again received losses.
The enterprise produces an immeasurable amount of products
and is in the loss zone.
If the loss in the beginning,
when our entire plant was produced with just one pen,
was still understandable,
and it was clear that if we increase the production,
if we leave this initial stage,
everything will be fine.
The loss we have now
is a reflection of our incompetence.
Because knowing that increasing the volume of production to infinity
will lead us to the loss zone,
we would not have accelerated or increased this production.
That's why we study this discipline.
Today you are armed with knowledge.
Today you know that it is impossible
to increase the volume of production to infinity.
Because apart from losses,
you will not get anything else.
It's a mutually sharp razor.
It would seem that the more production,
the more honor, glory, profit, and so on.
But no.
There comes a moment when the profit is zero,
loss, and the enterprise is destroyed.
With a gigantic volume of production,
it would seem that this is what you can only dream about.
That's why we study this science.
Why do we study it?
We try to understand and choose
the most optimal operating regime of the enterprise.
The point X3
has different names in economic literature.
It is called the second point of profitability,
the threshold of profitability.
I would call it a little differently.
Look, the point X1 is a point without loss.
There was a loss on the left,
but we moved and became without loss.
Look at the point X3.
There was a profit on the left,
but we moved and became without profit.
Therefore, the point X3 is more rational
to call it a point without profit.
If the point X1 is a point without loss,
then the point X3 is a point without profit.
We move from the profit zone to the loss zone,
moving from left to right along this graph.
Now we have seen and analyzed all the points
on this graph.
Now we can look at it from the bird's eye view.
We can see the entire graph
and see how the enterprise should work
within this entire graph.
We move from left to right again,
from zero to increasing quantity.
At first, production grows,
but it grows slower than the costs.
There are constant costs.
The cost curve does not start from zero.
It starts from a certain value.
Even if the quantity of goods is zero,
there are costs.
You need to build a workshop.
You can not produce anything in this workshop,
but you need to build it.
You need to bear the costs for production.
Then these costs start to grow,
because variable costs appear,
and production starts.
But at the same time, the revenue grows.
The revenue grows more dynamically
than the variable costs.
It grows faster.
And finally, the point X1 is a point without loss.
The profit is zero.
And in this delta of the loss zone,
we analyze the behavior.
We say that at this moment,
the profit starts to increase,
and it is desirable to produce more goods,
if we cross the point of no loss.
This was the first question of our lecture,
when we were considering all this.
And then the amount of profit increases,
and we get to the point X2.
This is the optimal point for production.
Our Russian business is getting harder.
All the sociological polls show
that it is getting harder to the point X2.
Even if we are not at the point X2,
and we are not fulfilling the conditions
of the production volume,
the business wants to be at this point.
It is striving for it,
to get the maximum profit from the production.
This is due to the fact that,
on the one hand,
there are difficulties with the production volume,
and on the other hand,
our Russian business does not have enough capital
to produce goods.
If all the businessmen had enough capital,
our enterprises would be like McDonald's,
built all over the globe.
But not all the businessmen have so much capital.
But this does not prevent each of them
from setting up their very first enterprise
for the optimal mode of production.
To get the maximum profit from the production.
This is the point X2.
If you have only one enterprise,
set it up at this point.
Calculate it.
And hold on to it.
Do not go left or right.
Be at this point X2.
This will be the optimal point for your production.
A step to the left or right is worse
than being at the point X2.
Except if your capital is so great
that you can either start to distribute
or increase the production volume
on the scale of your enterprise.
That is, to saturate,
intensify the means of production
to get the maximum profit from the production unit.
So that there is not a single square centimeter
where the production process would not go.
If you can set it up like this,
then you will go to the mode
that is typical for Japanese production.
You will squeeze the maximum profit
from each square meter of the enterprise.
But this requires certain efforts
and, most importantly, a mental approach.
For this, the Japanese need to appreciate
every square meter of their territory,
their land or their enterprise.
But in no case do not allow the transition to point X3.
Remember that it exists.
Yes, it is far away.
It is not close.
Why not close?
Because it does not mean that if you increased
the production unit, you got to the point of loss.
No.
The inefficiency of production is not so much expressed.
But nevertheless, it exists.
It exists, and you need to remember this.
You need to remember that you cannot
increase the production volume to infinity.
You can't even set such a goal.
You should always produce the optimal amount.
But if you want to produce a lot,
then print, but the production should be optimized.
This is the analysis of the chart we have discussed.
This is the most important chart.
Probably, in today's lecture,
this is the most important chart.
It is very informationally rich.
It gives a lot of information,
allows you to develop the strategy of your enterprise,
to direct the development of your enterprise.
It requires, first of all, to determine where you are.
And, accordingly, by determining where you are,
to develop the direction of movement,
the direction of further development.
The most important thing is that you should remember
that there is an optimum.
You should find this optimum and be in it.
And then your business will flourish.
You will be happy and satisfied.
And you will tell everyone that thanks to the lectures
you have learned in MBA,
you started to run your business even better than before.
In conclusion, after we have considered
its essence, its logic,
we will stop at the formalized side of this issue.
The fact is that any logical conclusions
always lead to the level of practical use.
At the same time, a mathematical apparatus is used
that allows to formalize this logic.
Thus, in the issue we have just discussed,
we have studied the obtaining of maximum profit.
This is possible with a certain combination
of production volume, product price,
and costs for production.
Maximization of profit is the choice of such production volume,
where the maximum costs for production
and the realization of the product
are equal to the maximum profit.
What is the maximum profit?
It is the increase of revenue per unit
of the increase of the number of produced products.
The production revenue per number of produced products.
The maximum costs are equal to the increase of costs
per unit of the increase of the number of produced products.
This is also production.
Thus, going back, we can say that
the maximization of profit is the production volume
where the production revenue and the maximum costs
are equal to each other.
That is, neither the income nor the costs
grow faster than each other, but are equal.
When they are equal,
the maximization of the profit
obtained by the enterprise is achieved.
The enterprise must expand the production volume
until the maximum income is higher than the maximum costs.
That is, until the income grows faster than the costs.
And vice versa, stop any expansion
as soon as the maximum costs grow faster than the maximum income.
We have already said that there is an optimal production volume
with the maximum profit.
How can we calculate the value of the optimal production volume?
There are three ways to calculate this.
First of all, I must say that there is no ready-made formula
that can be substituted and get the result in one second.
The fact is that nonlinear processes
are very difficult to describe
as a function of the production itself.
Therefore, methods are used
that are difficult to study the process itself.
There are three ways to determine the optimal production volume.
Accounting, analytical, graphical and statistical.
Accounting and analytical are in cooperation with accounting information.
Here the maximum income and maximum costs are compared.
And it is compared in the sense that which of them grows faster.
This comparison will be carried out until we find
such a state of maximum income and maximum costs
when they grow at the same rate.
This is the optimal point that allows us to talk
about the achievement of the maximum profit of the production unit.
That is, the accountant can use this method
and calculate the optimal production volume for us.
There is a graphical method.
It is presented on the slide that you see now.
It is a graph in the framework of the production volume and costs.
The graph is built in which the changes of the maximum costs
and the changes of the maximum income are compared.
We know that if we increase the production volume,
then the increase in the production volume with the increase in each unit will decrease.
Remember the glass of water in the summer heat.
Every glass of water you drink brings you satisfaction,
but less and less compared to the previous one.
So here you see that the maximum income is decreasing all the time.
This is the pleasure you get with every subsequent glass of water.
Yes, it is positive, but it is less and less.
And the maximum costs are the costs that arise
with the growth of costs that arise in this production process.
And the maximum costs increase because they become less effective.
Academics start working with a chisel and a hammer.
And these curves intersect.
Finally, the maximum costs become equal to the maximum income.
And when they become equal,
this is the point at which we reach the maximum income of a unit of production.
And the statistical method.
When a table is built in which the different volumes of production are arranged,
and they look at the costs and the revenue at a given volume of production.
The results are compared and they look at the maximum income.
The tools that you will consider in the e-book that is attached to this lecture,
all these methods are considered in more detail.
Examples of calculations are given, and you can now stop the lecture
and look carefully at each of these methods
and choose which one is more preferable for you.
I want to tell you again that there is no single formula
in which you can substitute some data
and instantly say the point of the volume of optimal production.
Therefore, this is a more complicated process
that requires careful research
to determine the point of optimal production.
Nevertheless, it is practically feasible,
and you can safely give the task to your most responsible economists,
accountants, to calculate, compare and determine
the volume of the optimal volume of production.
And then make the only strategic right decision
that will allow you to work in this mode of optimal production.
OPERATIONAL LEVER
Now we move on to the third and final question of our lecture.
The question is about the operational lever.
The operational lever is also one of the techniques
that allows to judge how economically this enterprise is developing.
No, it is not some kind of mechanical tool,
these are techniques of financial management
that can be used, that need to be known,
used in order to use them in practice.
The operational lever is an opportunity for the enterprise
to influence the profit by changing the structure of its cost
and the volume of production.
By changing certain parameters within the enterprise,
you can achieve an increase in profit at your enterprise.
In essence, the operational lever depends
only on the structure of the costs at your enterprise.
And you should remember that you have constant and variable costs.
The size of the operational lever depends on the structure of these costs.
The effect of the operational lever is that
even the smallest changes in the volume of sales
after reaching the point of no loss
cause significant changes in the economic results.
Therefore, it is very important to reach the point
where you compensate all the costs that you have.
Constant costs.
And after that, the movement after this point
begins to sharply increase the profit that you have.
The effect of the operational lever is determined
as the relationship of the shaft margin to the profit.
This is the formula for calculating this effect.
Enterprises with high operational lever effects
have higher profits than enterprises
with a small operational lever.
This is a very important point,
it should be remembered and we should look carefully
at the effect of the operational lever at your enterprise.
It is very important to strive for the increase of the effect of the operational lever.
To do this, you just need to increase the volume of production,
it will increase, and with this, the profit will increase.
However, you should remember that
if you have a very high effect of the operational lever
and you are proud of it,
after the slightest increase in the volume of production
the profit sharply increases, it is just wonderful.
But any medal has a downside.
If, by chance, the volume of production
begins to decrease at your enterprise,
then at the same rapid pace, the profit will begin to fall.
The faster it grows, the faster it falls
with a high effect of the operational lever.
And vice versa, at the enterprise with a small effect
the decrease in the volume of production
does not cause such a significant decrease in the profit,
just as it does not cause its significant increase.
Since the profit is very sensitive to the change in the volume of production,
we can say that for enterprises with a high operational lever
the risk in business increases.
This risk is significant,
because with the slightest decrease in the volume of production
you risk losing a large amount of profit.
Therefore, it is stated that the higher the effect of the operational lever
on the enterprise, the higher the risk of entrepreneurship.
If you are very close to the point of no loss,
then every percent of the volume of production
causes a significant increase in the profit.
But the further you move away from the point of no loss,
the more your production volume grows,
the less the subsequent percent of the volume of production
causes a decrease in the profit.
The effect of the operational lever decreases.
It does not grow, it does not remain constant,
but it gradually decreases as the volume of production increases.
We will now fix these data on the example we will consider.
Pay attention to the slide that is now in front of you.
We have two enterprises that produce the same product.
Two different factories, the same product.
Since it is the same product, the price of this product is the same.
Let's say the price is 200 rubles.
The numbers are conditional, since the product is the same.
What is the difference between these two enterprises?
Pay attention.
The first enterprise has old equipment and constant costs are small.
It is old, cheap equipment.
The second enterprise has the latest equipment.
It is more expensive, more perfect,
it allows you to have a higher productivity,
it saves the lives of the workers, but it is more expensive.
The first enterprise has constant costs,
the costs that change with the increase in the volume of production,
let it be 160 rubles.
The second enterprise, due to the fact that it has more perfect equipment,
which increases the productivity of the labor,
in other words, it requires less workers than the first one.
More productive equipment.
Therefore, the costs for the salary are less.
Therefore, we say that the costs for the salary are less, 140 rubles.
Both enterprises have the same production volume.
Let it be 25 thousand units, both enterprises produce the same amount of products.
Here is a question.
In these two enterprises, what is the effect of the operational lever?
Which of these enterprises can use the effect of the operational lever
and use it in their business?
Let's calculate it.
Such calculations will be included in the home task that you will perform.
This example that we are doing now
helps you to complete the home task,
but this is not the main thing now,
this is not a tip for completing the home task.
The main thing is to understand the logic and meaning of the phenomenon of the effect of the operational lever.
In order to calculate this task,
you need to determine the threshold of profitability for each enterprise.
In other words, you need to calculate the point of profitability for each enterprise.
Why are you asking me?
Here's the thing.
The thing is that our enterprise produces 25 thousand units of products according to the task.
And where is the point of 25 thousand units?
To the left or to the right of the point of profitability?
The thing is that if it is to the left of the point of profitability,
then our enterprise is at a loss.
If it is to the right of the point of profitability,
then it is profitable.
The management decisions are completely different in this case.
We calculate the point of profitability for the first enterprise and for the second.
At first, you see the formula for calculating the point of profitability.
It is defined as the constant costs on the one hand in the numerator,
and in the denominator, the price minus the variable costs of the unit of production.
By substituting the value in this formula, we get that for the first enterprise,
the point of profitability is 15 thousand units of products,
and for the second enterprise, it is 20 thousand units of products.
What does it mean?
It means that our first enterprise should produce no less than 15 thousand units of this product,
otherwise it will be at a loss.
You see, this is a very important point.
We calculated how much we should produce.
And the second enterprise should produce no less than 20 thousand units of this product,
because the equipment is expensive.
Expensive equipment makes us produce more products.
But in our example, both 15 thousand and 20 thousand units of products
are lower than the production volume that we produce.
Remember, according to our task, our enterprise produces 25 thousand units of products.
Therefore, both enterprises work in the profit zone and get profits.
After we have determined the point of profitability,
the point of profitability for each enterprise,
and found out that each of these enterprises works in the profit zone and gets profits,
we can carry out further calculations and solutions to our task.
What interests us?
We are interested in the effect of the operating lever.
This effect is related to the profit.
For the first enterprise, this effect is determined by the formula that you see on the slide.
In the numerator, the marginal profit is determined as the difference between the revenue and the variable costs.
200 minus 160, as per our task.
And in the denominator, the profit is more difficult to calculate.
To calculate the profit, we need to subtract both the variable and the constant costs from the revenue.
200 minus 160, as per our task.
And we also need to subtract the constant costs.
We will determine the constant costs when we divide the total amount of constant costs,
remember, according to the task, 600 thousand constant costs,
by the production volume.
And the production volume is 25 thousand units.
We divide 600 thousand by 25 thousand, and we get the amount of the constant costs.
The unit of production.
Thus, in the denominator, we subtract the variable costs from the revenue,
then the constant costs.
We get the profit.
Then we divide the marginal profit by the profit.
It turns out that for the first enterprise, if you do calculations,
2.5 units is the effect.
The same we calculate for the second enterprise.
But in the second enterprise, the variable costs are lower, 140, and not 160.
The numerator increases.
But we will have changes in the denominator.
In the denominator, the value of the constant costs per unit of production will change.
First, the total costs have increased.
They are not 600 thousand, but 1.2 million.
Therefore, 1.2 million divided by 25 thousand,
we get the constant costs per unit of production.
We take into account that the variable costs are now 140, not 160.
We substitute there, and we do the calculation.
We get that for the second enterprise, the effect of the lever is 5.
What do these coefficients mean?
The effect of the lever in this case will tell us
how many times the profit will increase faster
compared to the growth of the volume of production.
That is, if in the first enterprise,
for every 1% of the growth of the volume of production in the production,
the profit will be 2.5%,
then for the second enterprise,
every 1% of the growth of the volume of production
causes a 5% increase in profit.
Both there and there, the volume of production increases by 1%.
Pay attention.
Moreover, the enterprise produces the same product.
The prices are the same.
The growth of the volume of production increased by 1%.
But in the second case,
only because the effect of the lever is more profitable,
better than in the first enterprise,
we get 2 times more profit than in the first enterprise.
With other equal ones.
That is, we see that the effect of the operational lever
in the first enterprise allows the enterprise
with a higher effect to get a higher profit
with the growth of the volume of production.
With equal efforts, the profits are significantly higher.
We have noticed here that the operational lever
is essentially caused by the change in the structure of costs.
The second enterprise has more constant costs than variable ones.
There is new equipment.
And in the first enterprise,
the constant costs are less.
There is old, outdated equipment,
cheap equipment.
Thus, we see that the improvement of the equipment,
which leads to an increase in the productivity of labor,
a reduction in the costs of variables,
leads to an increase in the effect of the operational lever
and, at the same time,
the opportunity to get a higher profit
with the same increase in the volume of production.
That is, if an enterprise wants to get a higher profit,
it must change the structure of its costs
so that the share of constant costs
is greater than the share of variable costs.
Constant costs should be more than variable costs.
The attitude of constant costs to variable costs should increase.
Then the effect of the operational lever will be stronger
and then the enterprise will get more and more profit
per unit of increase in the volume of production.
What is the role of the business?
After today's lecture,
you, as a businessman,
will be interested in optimizing the structure of your enterprise,
the structure of constant and variable costs,
to work in the optimal mode
and get the maximum profit per unit of production.
If you achieve this,
if it becomes real for you
and you can do it at your enterprise,
then I believe that this lecture has achieved its result.
And we have not wasted this time in vain.
You can now take great advantage of it.